



Virtualized Conversations                                   J. Rosenberg
Internet-Draft                                               jdrosen.net
Intended status: Informational                         10 September 2026
Expires: 14 March 2027


Virtualized Conversations (VCON) Restructure to Facilitate AI Agent Use
                                 Cases
                draft-rosenberg-vcon-restructure-latest

Abstract

   The Virtualized Conversations (VCON) specification provides a
   structured format for storing recordings of conversations, including
   phone calls, email threads and multi-party chats.  VCONs also store
   metadata like call transcripts and mid-call events, like a call hold
   or addition of a party.  Its structure is well suited for 2-party and
   basic multiparty phone calls.  However, there is a need for the VCON
   format to also act as a record of AI Agent conversations, which are
   just another type of conversation.  This document proposes changes to
   the object model in VCON to make it a more suitable format for
   handling AI Agent conversations, as well as more complex conferencing
   use cases.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://jdrosen.github.io/vcon-restructure/draft-rosenberg-vcon-
   restructure.html.  Status information for this document may be found
   at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rosenberg-vcon-
   restructure/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Virtualized
   Conversations Working Group mailing list (mailto:vcon@ietf.org),
   which is archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/vcon/.
   Subscribe at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/vcon/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/jdrosen/vcon-restructure.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 14 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Data Model
     3.1.  Session
     3.2.  Parties and Participants
     3.3.  Events
     3.4.  Dialogs
   4.  Example Use Cases
     4.1.  Basic Phone Call
     4.2.  Basic Online Meeting
     4.3.  Online Meeting - Speaker Separation
     4.4.  AI Agent Voice Session
     4.5.  AI Agent Chat Session
     4.6.  SMS Conversation
     4.7.  Contact Center - Queue Plus Agent
     4.8.  Consultation Transfer
   5.  AI Authorship Declaration
   6.  Security Considerations
   7.  IANA Considerations
   8.  References
     8.1.  Normative References
     8.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   The Virtualized Conversations (VCON) specification [VCON] provides a
   structured format for storing recordings of conversations, including
   phone calls, email threads and multi-party chats.  VCONs also store
   metadata like call transcripts and mid-call events, like a call hold
   or addition of a party.  Its structure is well suited for 2-party and
   basic multiparty phone calls.

   However, there is a need for the VCON format to also act as a record
   of AI Agent conversations, which are just another type of
   conversation.  Recent work by Birkholz [BIRK] has proposed a new
   format for recording AI Agent conversations, and a merged draft has
   been written to try and bring those into VCON [HOWE].

   During the VCON interim meeting on 9th September 2026, a proposal was
   floated for a change to VCON that would cover these additional cases.
   This document writes up the change that was discussed.  It presents
   the core data model, composed of two new objects - session and
   events.  It then goes on to look at a variety of use cases and shows
   how they are handled by this data model.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Data Model

   The basic data model is backwards compatible with the current vcon
   spec, and basically is composed of four primary objects - session
   (new), events (new), dialog (existing, but modified), and parties/
   participants (existing, but modified).  VCON defines many other
   attributes, like extensions, subject, etc. which are unchanged and
   not discussed further here.  The goal here is to explain just the
   primary first-class objects which are central to modeling use cases.
   Everything else is really just meta-data ontop of that.

3.1.  Session

   The session object is new to this proposal.  A session represents an
   instance of a continuous conversation amongst one or more
   participants, for which the context of the conversation starts empty
   and grows through the conversation.  We use the term context here to
   refer to both the memory collected in the minds of the humans
   participating, but also to Large Language Model (LLM) context which
   would be fed into an LLM with an AI Agent in the conversation.  A
   session has a start and it has an end.

   Within the confines of the session, there is a timeline that contains
   both events and dialogs.  An event is a point-in-time action
   performed by a singular participant relevant to the conversation,
   such as pressing a DTMF key, the departure of a user from the
   conversation, or the invocation of a tool.  A dialog is a record of
   information exchanged amongst participants, such as an audio
   recording, a text message, or an image.

   In a simple phone call between two people, there is a single session.
   A traditional conference call - like a Zoom or Webex meeting - would
   also be a single session.  Even though participants may come and go
   in a meeting, there is still a collective advancement of the context
   as the meeting progresses.  For example, a user might join 10 minutes
   late and then inquire, "hey, what happened so far?".  The answer
   given by someone who has been in the meeting represents this context.

   Along similar lines, a conversation between a user and ChatGPT with
   fresh context represents a single session.  If a user calls a 1-800
   number and is connected to a voice AI Agent, that is also a single
   session.

   Importantly, a session can contain other sessions.  This happens when
   the parent session spawns the child session.  The child session -
   being a full-fledged session - has its own start and stop, and has a
   reset of context when it begins - though it will typically be started
   with context created by the parent session.  We consider two examples
   to make this clear.  The first is a meeting which spawns two
   sidebars.  Each sidebar is, in its own right, a distinct meeting -
   with distinct participants, a distinct timeline.  Similarly, an AI
   Agent session - such as a Claude Code session - can result in
   spawning of sub-agents to perform a certain task.  Each of those
   would be a distinct session.

   A session has participants, which refer to the entities (humans and
   AI agents) which were privy to at least some portion of the session.
   They may not have all been there all of the time, however.

   A session has an ID, unique only to the internals of the VCON
   document.  This allows for sessions to reference each other.

   The top level VCON has an array of sessions.  One use case where
   there might be more than one, is when a VCON represents all of the
   calls made by a particular user in a given month, exported as a
   single VCON.  In that case, there would be many sessions, one for
   each call.  The top-level parties object would contain that user's
   party information, but also there would be an entry for every other
   person that the user in question spoke to.

   In summary:

   *  Session

      -  Participants

      -  StartTime

      -  EndTime

      -  ID

      -  Child Sessions

      -  Dialogs

      -  Events

3.2.  Parties and Participants

   The VCON specification defines Parties as an array of participants at
   the top-level of the VCON object.  This remains as it is - a list of
   participants that were involved somehow in the conversaion(s)
   decribed by the VCON object.  This document proposes adding an "id"
   parameter, which is an identifier for this participant unique only
   within the confines of the VCON object.  This allows for easy
   reference to each party from the other objects in the data model -
   session, event and dialog.

   A session contains an array of Participants, each one of which is the
   id of a participant that was involved in the session.  As noted
   above, a party is included in the list of participants n the session
   if that party was involved in the session at some point.

   A dialog contains an array of Participants, each of which is the id
   of a participant that received the entire content of the dialog.

   An event contains a single Participant, which is the id of the
   participant that generated the event.

   Simply put - Parties is a flag list of human or AI entities, without
   regard to their specific involvement in a session, dialog or event.
   Participants is a reference to one of more of those parties -
   referenced by id - indicating which of them were involved in a
   session, dialog or event.

   The current VCON includes a parties array as a child of dialog.  The
   Participants array provides an alternative to it, referencing each
   participant specifically by ID, instead of by index.  The usage of a
   reference by ID means it is trivial to redact/remove parties or
   participants without changing the indexing operation.

3.3.  Events

   An event is a point-in-time action performed by a singular
   participant relevant to the conversation, such as pressing a DTMF
   key, the departure of a user from the conversation, or the invocation
   of a tool.

   An event always happens within a context of a session.  In other
   words, the session is a container and it contains events (and
   dialogs).  This means that the session object includes an array of
   events.  This is optional, since there may not be any events.

   An event is always invoked by a particular participant, which is the
   one that is responsible for causing that event.  An event, being a
   point-in-time, has a time at which it happened.  Events have a type,
   which defines the type of event.  And then it has data, which is a
   data specific to the event type.  For a keyup event, the data would
   be the DTMF key that was pressed (e.g., the number 8).

   The event object replaces and subsumes the Party_History object
   defined in VCON.  Each of the party history events - join, drop,
   hold, unhold, mute, unmute, keydown, keyup - are a supported value
   for the event type.

   This document also suggests adding two additional events: start-
   speaking and end-speaking, which can be used to capture active
   speaker detection in a call or conference.  These events would
   contain the id of the party who started (or stopped) speaking.

   For an AI Agent session, there would be additional events for tool
   call request, tool call response, and reasoning event, which would be
   defined in an extension to VCON for AI Agents.

   Transfer gets modeled as an event also - more accurately, by a set of
   events: blind-transfer, consult-start, consult-transfer, and consult-
   conference.  The blind-transfer event is used for blind transfers.
   It contains a reference to the session (session, not dialog) which is
   the result of the blind transfer.  Often this would be the last event
   in the parent session, since the session ends upon transfer.  The
   consult-start event indicates that a consultation transfer has begun,
   and it too contains a reference to the session which represents the
   consultation call.  If the consult call results in a transfer, the
   original session would see a consult-transfer, and the second spawned
   session ends.  The consult-conference event handles the case where
   the consultation results in a conference and not a transfer.
   Examples are provided in detail in sections below.

   The events are extensible.

   In summary -

   *  event

      -  id

      -  time

      -  participant

      -  type

      -  data

3.4.  Dialogs

   A dialog represents a piece of content contributed by one or more
   participants, and then shared to one or more other participants in
   the session.  A dialog has a start and optional duration.  It also
   has a mediatype, allowing the dialog to represent audio, video, text,
   images or other content types.

   In this data model, Dialogs are included within a session.  Each
   session has an array of Dialogs.  The VCON spec allows the Dialog
   object to exist as a top-level object too.  This document proposes
   retaining that for backwards compatibility; but go-forward
   implementations should include them only at the session level.

   The main example of a dialog is an audio recording.  Their usage in
   VCON allows for several distinct ways to represent the audio content
   of a session.

   1.  A single dialog for the entire session, representing the mix of
       audio from all participants, in a single audio channel.

   2.  A single dialog for the entire session, with multiple channels,
       and a channel dedicated to each participant

   3.  A single dialog for the entire session, with multiple channels,
       and each channel contains a mix of one or more participants
       [NOTE: This is a common use case when stereo recordings are made
       off of a multiparty call; one participant usually shows up in one
       channel, and the mix of the others in the second channel]

   4.  Multiple dialogs in the session, where each dialog represents a
       non-overlapping segment of time, and contains the mix of audio
       from all participants

   5.  Multiple dialogs in the session, where each dialog represents a
       non-overlapping segment of time, and contains the mix of audio
       from those participants who were speaking at that time,

   6.  Multiple dialogs in the session, where each dialog represents a
       non-overlapping segment of time, and contains the a multi-channel
       audio file where each participant that was speaking during that
       segment of time is in its own channel

   7.  Multiple dialogs in the session, where the dialogs are
       overlapping in time, and it contains the audio content from a
       single participant.  For example, if there were three
       participants in a conference call, there would be three dialogs,
       each of which begins when that participant joins the meeting, and
       ends when that participant leaves

   The goal is that the dialog object can support all of these, and it
   is up to the generator of the VCON to decide which to use.

   Dialogs are the core object in VCON and largely unchanged by this
   proposed restructuring.  However, to make the role of participants
   clear, this document proposes adding the following additional
   parameters:

   *  Contributors: The list of parties (by id) who contributed to the
      content in this dialog.

   *  Participants: This is a list of parties (by id) who received this
      dialog in its entirety.

   *  ChannelParticipantMap: This is a map which maps a channel in the
      audio recording, to a list of participants whose audio is mixed
      into that channel for the entirety of the dialog.  If the audio
      recording is dual-channel, the map would have two entries - 0 and
      1.  This is optional and only relevant for multi-channel audio.

   Note well - the omission of a user from the participants list does
   NOT mean that they didn't receive that dialog.  It just means there
   is no definitive statement about whether they received it or not.

   There is in essence two distinct lists of participants here - those
   that contributed, and those that received.  This allows the dialog
   model to represent asymmetric use cases.  One such example is a town-
   hall style meeting, where an executive is speaking to the company.
   In such a use case, there would be a single contributor, but multiple
   participants receiving it.  Indeed, the model allows for the VCOn to
   capture who heard what portions of the meeting, which can be useful
   for cases where a user is required to participate in a meeting, and
   their attendance is to be recorded.

   For backwards compatibility, the dialog object still supports the
   parties attribute, but it is effectively superceded by the two new
   attributes defined here.

   The recording-set type is removed in this proposal, replaced by the
   session concept.

   The transfer type is also removed in this proposal, replaced by
   transfer events.

   OPEN QUESTION: if a document is shared amongst participants, for
   example in a group chat - it was uploaded to the group chat - should
   that be a dialog and not an Attachment?

   In summary:

   *  Dialog

      -  StartTime

      -  Duration

      -  ID

      -  Contributors

      -  Participants

      -  ChannelParticipantMap

4.  Example Use Cases

   This section shows example use cases and how the data model would be
   used to model it.

4.1.  Basic Phone Call

   In this basic case, user A calls user B and they have a phone call.
   The call is recorded by their mobile operator or perhaps their UCaaS
   provider if it was a business call.

   The VCON in this case is simple - one session, one dialog.  There are
   two parties, and both are contributors and participants in the mixed
   audio recording.  The call started at time T1 and ended at time T2.
   The VCON would look like this.

   *  Parties

      -  Party

         o  ID: Party1

         o  Name: Alice

      -  Party

         o  ID: Party2

         o  Name: Bob

   *  Sessions

      -  Session

         o  ID: Sess1

         o  StartTime: T1

         o  EndTime: T2

         o  Participants

            +  P1

            +  P2

         o  Dialogs

            +  Dialog

               *  ID: Dialog1

               *  StartTime: T1

               *  Duration: T2 - T1

               *  Contributors

                  -  P1

                  -  P2

               *  Participants

                  -  P1

                  -  P2

4.2.  Basic Online Meeting

   Consider a simple Webex or Zoom meeting or similar.  There are three
   participants.  They all join at slightly different times near the
   start of the meeting at T1.  There is a single recording of the audio
   content of the meeting, which is a single channel audio recording
   containing a mix of all participants.

   *  Parties

      -  Party

         o  ID: Party1

         o  Name: Alice

      -  Party

         o  ID: Party2

         o  Name: Bob

      -  Party

         o  ID: Party3

         o  Name: Charlie

   *  Sessions

      -  Session

         o  ID: Sess1

         o  StartTime: T1

         o  EndTime: T2

         o  Participants

            +  P1

            +  P2

            +  P3

         o  Dialogs

            +  Dialog

               *  ID: Dialog1

               *  StartTime: T1

               *  Duration: T2 - T1

               *  Contributors

                  -  P1

                  -  P2

                  -  P3

         o  Events

            +  Event

               *  ID: 1

               *  type: join

               *  time: T1 + 1

               *  participant: P1

            +  Event

               *  ID: 2

               *  type: join

               *  time: T1 + 2

               *  participant: P2

            +  Event

               *  ID: 3

               *  type: join

               *  time: T1 + 4

               *  participant: P3

   It looks a lot like the VCON for the 2-party call with notable
   differences.  First, there is a third party in the party list.  There
   is still a single dialog, representing the recording of the entire
   meeting from T1 to T2.  We also have the list of contributors - P1,
   P2 and P3.  Being in the list means that they contributed to the
   dialog at some point.  Notice however, the list of participants is
   removed from the dialog object.  This is because the three
   participants joined at different times a few minutes after the
   meeting start.  The definition provided for the participants object
   in a dialog is that - presence there means that user received the
   entirety of the dialog.  In this case, none of them did because.

4.3.  Online Meeting - Speaker Separation

4.4.  AI Agent Voice Session

4.5.  AI Agent Chat Session

4.6.  SMS Conversation

4.7.  Contact Center - Queue Plus Agent

4.8.  Consultation Transfer

5.  AI Authorship Declaration

   No AI was used to author this document.

6.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [BIRK]     Birkholz, H., Heldt, T., and O. Steele, "Verifiable Agent
              Conversation Records", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-birkholz-verifiable-agent-conversations-01, 31
              August 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-
              birkholz-verifiable-agent-conversations-01>.

   [HOWE]     McCarthy-Howe, T., "vCon Agent Session", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-howe-vcon-agent-session-00, 20 May
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-howe-
              vcon-agent-session-00>.

   [VCON]     Petrie, D., "The JSON format for vCon - Conversation Data
              Container", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              vcon-vcon-core-04, 7 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-vcon-
              vcon-core-04>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Author's Address

   Jonathan Rosenberg
   jdrosen.net
   Email: jdrosen@jdrosen.net
